Figure C8: SIPHON
To present, now, in a low chamber, moist
And busy, full of engines intertwined
Lever and waterwheel, pulley and joist
Rotate and shift, most cunningly designed.
From smaller cups to larger, so we find
Each trickle turns a larger, slower wheel
The tiniest turn quickest, while the mind
Can barely credit that the largest reel
Is turned by little drops, a Juggernaut of steel.

Figure B2: SPINDRIFT
In daylight, now, see breakers crash and hiss,
They bring ambiguous gifts, long afloat:
This fetid mass, the precious AMBERGRIS,
Or refuse from the galley of a boat?
An emerald, fit for a prince&rsquo;s throat,
Or weathered fragment of a flask of ale?
A totem, black and horn&eacute;d like a goat,
Or casing in which infant sharks set sail?
Art and nature blend as mermaid&rsquo;s top and tail.

Figure C1: NEBEL
Westward from that shore, we see a wall
Frozen but indistinct, as if a cloud
Were still and square: through a ghostly hall
We enter, footsteps muffled by the shroud
Of the strange pavement, for nothing loud
Can enter this blue chamber, builded well,
Each brick is an infinitesimal crowd
Of tiny atomies, an &Aelig;RO-GEL,
A smoke made solid, that no wind can e&rsquo;er dispel.

Figure D2: RELEASE
Downward to a well sunk deep below
The ocean&rsquo;s surface, in a rattling cage
Of iron bars&mdash; here, as white as snow,
In ice is trapped, by pressure and long age,
A treasure and a peril: history&rsquo;s page
May show this methane, product of the sun,
As worthy of our poor descendants&rsquo; rage
As we may be. Let it not be undone,
A fearful form of feedback, this, the CLATHRATE-GUN.

Figure E3: AMPHIBIAN
Take us now far from this tipping point
Into a future, cavernous, dim, with stink
Ammoniack and rank: without joint,
All smooth our round enclosure, nacre-pink,
This is the cockpit: see, the pilots think
And their great living vessel does obey.
The bladder closes round us and we sink
Or rise as it expands: in this far day
Such living submarines will ply their finny way.

Figure D4: NEAT
Disgorged like Jonah from the living barque
Wading through a foaming, busy sea
We pass between great buttresses and dark,
The members of a mighty BANYAN-TREE.
Trained by genetick arts to remedy
The planet&rsquo;s technological distress,
Infusing its carbonic legacy
Into the ocean, where it may harm less.
See, the children play in waves that effervesce.

Figure E4: UNSTABLE
Around great limbs, a winding stair ascend
Up to a lofty chamber. Here, the fate
Of space itself is pondered; if it tend,
As must all things, unto a lower state
Of energy, the peril may be great.
The very vacuum splintering shall go
From one small seed, dying at the rate
Of light itself: small comfort, for this woe,
That if or when it happen, none can ever know.

Figure D3: SATURN
These upper rooms are to celestial spheres
Devoted: present, now, a cork-lined room
Sacred to SATURNUS, long of years.
Pale yellow, nursing Titan&rsquo;s icy womb,
Though lord of death and of the leaden tomb
And that old verse which ancient Latins sing
Yet light enough to float like ocean&rsquo;s spume
(If it were possible to do the thing)
And round a giant bathtub leave a mighty ring.

Figure E2: ICES
Still backward run the clock, until we see
(In inward vision of the heavens past)
A maelstrom of nebulosity
Around the infant Sun. Revolving fast,
The inner circle, subject to the blast
Of newborn light, too hot for ice to form:
Outwards, frosty fragments form the vast
Gas giants: &rsquo;twixt them, planetesimals swarm.
The FROST-LINE great from small partitions, cool from warm.
