Figure E10: TRIPLE-ALPHA
In the deep past, all was primal gas,
The exhalation of the fading roar
Of Universe&rsquo;s birth, but soon the mass
Of the first uncouth stars made at their core
A host of heavy atoms, and the spoor
Of their explosive deaths made all the land
And water, all of rich CREATION&rsquo;S store.
O, ye that wander, sift the ocean&rsquo;s sand:
How many ancient stars are nestled in your hand?

Figure D21: SOUP
Now to another beach, far harsher than
A bow of crystal sand and ocean blue.
The noisome shores of Earth, long before Man:
See in the ruddy clays a rancid stew
Of polymers, stirred and mixed anew,
By steaming tides and radiations scour&rsquo;d.
See! There! A lipid membrane splits in two,
Precipitates like curd in milk that&rsquo;s sour&rsquo;d,
And all its rival molecules are soon devour&rsquo;d.

Figure E9: FUMAROLE
Long ere upper ocean was alive
Hidden from the light of Earth&rsquo;s first day
Along a ridge volcanic, creatures thrive
Far from Sol&rsquo;s photosynthetic sway.
Mats of microbes feast on boiling clay,
Great tube-worms sport their bloody plumage well,
And here a squamous winkle makes its way
With scaly foot and iron sulphide shell,
A heavy metal snail, a mollusc fit for HELL.

Figure D25: AMMONITE
Northward from this gloomy deep, into
A sombre cavern, paved with spiral stones:
&ldquo;Once we sail&rsquo;d in sunny oceans blue,
&ldquo;Suspended by our buoyant phragmocones.
&ldquo;Now lie we buried deep beneath the bones
&ldquo;Of Earth, but shall be raised again to land,
&ldquo;As Shaligram of VISHNU that atones;
&ldquo;Or those bad serpents which Saint Hilda&rsquo;s hand
&ldquo;Will cast and turn to stone on holy Whitby&rsquo;s strand.&rdquo;

Figure E13: YIELD
Through a rude tunnel, north once more we fare
Into a chamber perilous indeed:
Here, deep in Afric stone, a crystal rare,
The yellow francevillite, sees water bleed
And moderate the neutrons&rsquo; fatal seed
To start a chain-reaction underground
Two billion years before mankind will breed.
The hills of OKLO ferment without sound
Or outward sign, a grim Prometheus yet bound.

Figure D17: ASH
From that ill chamber, in the solar track&mdash;
But still below, where never sun has shone&mdash;
And still in ancient time, we find a black
And cindered remnant of a world long gone,
HADEAN Earth, when fire danced upon
A sea of molten rock; when creatures dire
Disported in the lava. Pale and wan
To them would seem our world of buried fire,
The cooling of the crust to them a a funeral pyre.

Figure E5: SIDEROPHILE
A glowing spheroid, uniform and mixed,
Was Earth when first from nebula congealed
But soon it was in ordered layers fixed,
For Chaos soon to Gravity must yield,
And so, precipitate, the core was steeled,
In its collapse provoking such a wave
That throbbed the newly-formed magnetic field
So great auroras ran from sky to cave
Like to a rainbow, or the lasers at a RAVE.

Figure D5: TUNNEL
From pricking ozone glare, toward the south,
We tread a steep defile: a rising howl
Of wind is heard to fret the cavern&rsquo;s mouth:
A rudely formed and stalactited cowl.
The gale, irregular, as if a foul
And giant creature were by croup annoyed,
Like borborygmus in a Titan&rsquo;s bowel
As matter settles, breaks, and is destroyed:
The stuttered gale portends that we approach a VOID.

Figure C11: HOLLOW
We tread a fungous lawn as the wind dies.
The surface? No, but see a cavern vast,
A world inverse, with continental skies,
But not the shapes we know, for here the past
Of Earth survives: the saurians, the last
Of ancient Mu and of Atlantis proud.
Baluchitheria take their high repast
From ginkgo-trees. A twilight without cloud,
Low palaces beneath the starless heaven&rsquo;s shroud.
