Figure B3: STERILE
Here we may not linger &mdash; down a stair,
Which halfway turns to up, or so it seems,
Climb to a lonely strand. The briny air
Wakes our drowsy senses, and the gleams
Of breakers dazzle. The ocean teems
With life, but on the land is nothing more
Than arid rock, bleached by the Sun&rsquo;s beams.
Three milliards of years must pass before
The first brave plants begin to populate the shore.

Figure C2: DECANTER
Towards the west, a fair pavilion trace:
We enter through an arch of metal bright.
Though row on row of shelving fills the space,
The room withal is glittering and light,
For crystal vessels clear stand left and right,
Each with its epoch labelled with great care:
&ldquo;ORDOVICIAN &mdash; CARBONATED &mdash; NIGHT&rdquo;,
&ldquo;PERMIAN &mdash; HIGH ALPINE &mdash; VERY RARE&rdquo;,
The archives of the the sky, a library of air.

Figure D9: STRIKE
Northward to a garden, spare and clean,
Where, between raked vortices of sand,
Bare branches, with a smooth and glassy sheen,
But neither twig nor leaf, solemnly stand,
For these trunks are the marks of Zeus&rsquo; hand
Where lightning-blast has fused the very quartz
To stony columns: wind erodes the land
And leaves behind as FULGURITE the sports
Of ancient thunderclaps&rsquo; most echoing reports.

Figure C15: APOCALYPSE
By such a narrow pathway leading east
That we perforce must walk in single file
Between steep cliffs of ice. Here was the least
Of generations, winnowed by the trial
Of long volcanic winter. From the isle
Sumatra, covering the planet&rsquo;s face
With dust and ash, rising many a mile
From TOBA, reaching to the verge of space:
Thy shadow long, that near snuffed out the human race.

Figure D29: NILGIRI
Eastward still, into a stony square
Made of setts all in a honeycomb.
Here, on a time, from its plutonic lair
A great basaltic flood was let to roam,
A fiery sea with pyroclastic foam
Resistless in its terrible advance
A continent aflame: but soon to loam
Most fertile weathered down is the expanse.
SHIVA, the Destroyer, blessed be thy dance.

Figure C20: ASTHENOSPHERE
A hallway grand leads south, all dressed in stone
Of many shades: here is remembered by
Its native rocks, each continental zone
Of ancient time, long hidden from the sky.
Vaalbara&rsquo;s zircon, Doggerland yet dry,
Basalt slabs from Kerguelen afar,
Granite of Farall&oacute;n, tormented by
Tectonic might, and lost Zealandia&rsquo;s bar,
Beneath the southern waves a home to Neptune&rsquo;s car.

Figure D26: TYCHO&rsquo;S STAR
Ascending now, the Northern heavens view:
In Cassiopeia, a star burns bright,
Unknown to living memory. A new
Addition to the stellar sphere, that might
Admit no change: Elizabethan night
Disfigured by a NOVA. What foretold
The Queen&rsquo;s astrologer? A fearful sight,
Surpassing any alchemist of old,
The carbon of a star transmuted into gold.

Figure C22: ERIDANIA
Now in the present day, in a high room
As cold as ice with walls as red as rust,
With tapestries wove by no earthly loom
Depicting scenes of pageantry and lust,
Carnage and high adventure. But we must
Draw them aside, and fantasy&rsquo;s surcease
We trade for an utopia of dust
On which romance shall not extend its lease:
The planet named for WAR, eternally at peace.

Figure D28: BARYONIC
Kalpa upon Kalpa of cosmic time
Has passed for us: the stars no longer glow,
But orbit through a velvet night sublime,
Cold and in seeming spent. Yet, even so,
As atoms flicker languid to and fro
In &aelig;ons they may leap the quantum wall
To fuse and form the isotope we know
As iron, stablest nucleon of all:
Each star in time becomes a mighty CANNON-BALL.


