Figure D19: MÉLANGE
Not long that darkened future we disturb
But climb a stair down to a furnace-room
Whose coal is not of ancient buried herb
But refuse of long ages, in the womb
Of stone compressed: the midden-heap, the tomb,
The factory, the spaceship-yard, the cell.
Glowing red and giving off a fume
Kaleidoscopic, insolent and fell,
As if the sins of Earth were gathered in a smell.

Figure E7: IMMATERIAL
Westward away from this choking stench,
We pass into a vast, transparent void,
Where minds no longer held in bodies’ clench
Disport within an Earth long since destroyed,
Recycled and more gainfully employed
As substrate of this ALGEBRAICK SPHERE.
Now humankind shall never be annoyed
By flesh’s limitations, blind and drear,
But go as mystic monads, ever seeing clear.

Figure D7: TANGERE
Southward now, material once more,
To a great hall, echoing and chill,
Nothing is here, it seems, but walls and floor,
But through our bodies wild emotions thrill:
We love, we hate, we fear, we laugh, until
We know that from a world of glass and steel
Discarded, human souls these caverns fill,
Exiled by their owners from the Real,
Bereft of every power save to touch or feel.

Figure C5: APPETITE
Ascending now to a great banquet hall
We see a table, laden with a feast
Delicious in aroma: on each wall
Strange epiphytes and congeries of yeast
Serve us flesh not robbed from any beast,
A stew of trilobites, poached in white wine,
And many other species long deceased.
Here see art, science, Nature best combine,
And, with our end in sight, sit gratefully to dine.

Figure D12: HUBBUB
Our hunger sated, northward, to a cage
Of burnished copper. In the centre, see
A speaking pillar: “Ye of ancient age,
“Know that our science made telepathy,
“Long a vain dream, an actuality
“That caught all living things in its embrace,
“A global and unending colloquy.
“And so we scattered from this noisy place,
“Seeking refuge in the silences of SPACE.”

Figure E8: SOCIETY
Ascending to a chamber high and bright
In which a hundred thousand worlds are shown
Communing each to each: for in the night
That FERMI though so still, exchange has grown,
But only by mature species known.
So adolescents, socially outgunned,
Will in the grandest ballroom feel alone
And sit in silence, like a mullet stunned,
Or blurt inanities, then wonder why they’re shunned.

Figure D8: TEMPERATE
We travel south, to a black room so cold
Our breath emerges as a freezing fog.
The Universe, immeasurably old,
Has darkened to that stale, entropick bog
That scholars call HEAT DEATH: but as the log
Grows slower yet still grows, here life has ways
To eke out ancient stars. Time’s greatest cog
Ticks slower still, and creatures of those days
Little suspect that we dwelt in the Big Bang’s blaze.

Figure C4: AIRY
From this chill future to the present day,
A tower room of lapis and azure
With books and instruments. LE VERRIER
And Adams, independently, assure
Observers that a world unknown must draw
Uranus from its path. And so were France
And England set at scientific war.
(Yet GALILEO saw it: by mischance,
Just at the turning point of its apparent dance.)

Figure D11: TONANS
Northward to an onyx-marbled court
Whose floor is an enormous ruddy eye.
To JUPITER devote, and these his sport:
Sulphurous IO, maddened by the fly,
EUROPA’S ocean with its icy sky,
Remote CALLISTO, beauteous, rejoice
In thy Dian: and, borne by eagle high,
The handsome GANYMEDE: for Zeus’s choice
Is ofttimes like his thunder, in falsetto voice.
