Figure E6: SUPERMASSIVE
The second form of light that ever shone,
After a million years of neutral dark,
As matter screamed to show where it had gone&mdash;
Electron stripped from atom, quark from quark&mdash;
Still visible, red-shifted, clear and stark,
The mighty cauldron of the QUASI-STAR
Yet leaves upon the sky its blazing mark.
Stately elliptical, spiral or bar,
Each galaxy was once a door of Hell ajar.

Figure D6: EMISSION
Southward, substituting time for space:
Back before the force of gravity
Had kindled fire: darkness on the face
Of all the void, a dim serenity
Of neutral hydrogen, a sunless sea.
But e&rsquo;en the simplest atom has its song:
Though spin to counter-spin unlikely be
In one, in such great numbers do they throng
We hear the TWENTY-ONE LINE ring out clear and strong.

Figure C12: NOCTURNE
Back, further back, we see the Cosmic Void,
The space surrounding and preceding ALL.
With giddiness, our sense of scale destroyed,
What is this garden? Infinitely small&mdash;
Yet beautiful within its filmy caul,
Cloudy with galaxies&mdash; with what great pains
We hold our thoughts, lest the bauble fall
And shatter. There our Universe remains,
Safe from disturbance by our overheated brains.

Figure B5: GOLDEN
A marble rooftop, open to the sky,
Surrounded by eight towers, seen before:
Mercury hot and cold, and Venus dry,
Orthogonal Uranus, Neptune frore,
Terra and Luna, on their temperate shore;
The red of Mars and Jupiter&rsquo;s swirling dun, 
Cold Saturn in his rings of glitt&rsquo;ring hoar
And myriads of planetesimals run
All circling about their mighty mother SUN.

Figure C14: EINSTEIN
All spinning like a jewelled orrery:
But Mercury precessing, year to year,
Abrogates NEWTON&rsquo;S laws, and presently
We see his clockwork cosmos decohere.
Time slips, becoming relative: we fear
The loss of rugged mechanism&rsquo;s clasp.
But now we sense a burning hypersphere,
Spinoza&rsquo;s geometric God: we gasp
At fleeting visions that our minds can barely grasp.

Figure B6: LIFE
Endless futures branch, redoubling,
But life begins with jugglings so rare,
So subtle that the butterfly&rsquo;s soft wing
Is as Behemoth&rsquo;s footfall by compare.
You need not fear that other versions share
Your life in an alternate destiny:
Whether this bring joy or black despair,
Of one timeline alone are you made free,
The only UNIVERSE in which you came to be.

Figure C13: OBLITERATE
Descending for the last time into Earth
We reach a solemn catacomb of stone
Marked in an unknown script. Of little worth
Our struggle, then, if we must end alone,
Abandoning our citadel of bone.
Yet every person we encountered took
Impressions of us: memories are sown
No less than in a war or learn&eacute;d book,
In a confused expression or a dirty look.
	
Figure B4: FAINT
The truth is at the bottom of a well:
So said the Atomist in ancient days.
Yet here is fungus and an awful smell.
Is this, then, the conclusion of our maze?
Not so, for see the dimly gleaming rays
That whet, but do not satiate, our sight,
And, for the last time, upward find our ways
Out of damp, uncomfortable night,
To where, if not an end, at least there will be light.

Figure A1: VIVAMUS
A simple chamber, fresh with morning AIR,
A cheery FIRE burning in its grate.
Of EARTHEN flags the floor, well-swept and bare,
A table set with WATER, food and plate.
Ancient books that all the PAST relate
Or foreshadow the FUTURE yet to come,
Strange instruments to scry the HEAVENS&rsquo; state
Or the intestine DEPTHS of matter plumb:
All elements meet here, in equilibrium.

