Figure D27: WATCHER
Sobered, we leave that mournful place
Southward to an adamantine cell
A myriad of mirrors shows each face
In sparkling facets, wonderful to tell.
Here in this crystal, by atomic spell
All that was thought or said, each laugh, each curse
Is stored until the Universe's knell
The story of your life, your dreams, this verse
Until the very protons shimmer and disperse.

Figure C21: IRON
Flow back now, Time, and from the future long
Return us to our era: walls and floor
Of Iron now, corruptible and strong.
IRON, of this our Earth the fiery core;
IRON, gray as midnight, red with gore;
IRON that ploughs the field and tames the wild;
IRON, the soul of transport and of war;
IRON, for which we feed th'indignant child
Spinaches and liver, foodstuffs most revil'd.

Figure B8: RECURSIVE
On a resounding staircase we ascend
To daylight and a spacious colonnade
That faces hills, rolling without end
To the horizon. Of marble made
Dappled with patterns like to light and shade
On forest floor, or ripples in a lake
As if the same math'mathics were obeyed
In rock, in branch, in flesh, in waves that break:
All things with form from this their master-pattern take.

Figure C19: TRAVERTINE
Toward the south, our vision blocked by steam.
A whiff of sulphur and the sound of drops;
A gust of wind unveils, and, like a dream,
Appears a mighty terrace: from the tops
Of each stepp'd level, trickling water plops
Down to the next, and the droplets bear
Dissolvéd lime, insensibly which stops
To build, atom by atom, a rocky stair
Flowing, liquid, stony, lovely beyond compare.

Figure D22: TROGLOBITE
Spiraling down a sinkhole ringed with stairs
We descend once more into the ground.
A watery cave we find, with humid airs
Deep in darkness, but even here are found
Strange forms of life: bats that see with sound,
Long-legged bugs that palpitate their way
And in the streams translucent fish abound.
Here the OLM blindly hunts its prey,
Obscene and pallid worm, best hidden from the day.

Figure E11: TESTUDO
Move we again to far futurity
(Potential, as all such visions are):
Deep below the crust, a sunless sea
Is hidden from the wrath of mother star
As bloated, red, she turns the land to char.
Dark in light only: see, in INFRA-RED,
Deep vents glow bright, the surface black as tar.
Vast Leviathans swim here, filter-fed,
So life within continues though the shell be dead.

Figure D24: TERRA
Upward now, but not to scorching skies
Futures, by nature manifold, not one
An odour as of clay that bakes and dries
A room of rude ADOBE, where the sun
Filters thro' torn curtains: here has run
A million years of mixture, which has made
All matter jumbled, entropick and dun:
As coloured doughs, when long have children played,
Revert to an unhealthy purple-brownish shade.

Figure C10: GLOBE
By a crude door westward, to a pier
Of rough-hewn coral blocks amid a sea
Calm and shallow, marvellously clear.
Earth in its dotage lacks the energy
To rear up mountains, so the water, free
To grind and weather has worn down the world
To one vast shallows, where, languidly
The heirs of humans bask, gills unfurl'd,
No longer by the tides of earthly passions whirl'd.

Figure D15: INDOLENS 
Down where nameless horrors wind and slurp,
Dreaming on a dark abyssal plain
Of punishing those apes who dared usurp
Thy brutal, dark and cephalopodic reign-
But humans are no more; so all in vain
Thy long-departed cultists wail'd and leapt.
There are no brains to eat and plunge in pain:
Thy appointment with the stars was left unkept.
Alas, o Elder One, thou hast long overslept.
