Figure D1: GLACIAL
As we descend, with clouds of foggy breath
We enter a bleak citadel of ice
Facing a frozen plain. Nothing but death,
It seems, rules here: see the heavy price
Paid by the Earth, locked in a chilly vice.
Yet it was tiny microbes made this pall
(An age, yet in Earth's ages but a trice)
Whose oxygen made greenhouse gases fall:
Thus see a world transformed by the very small.

Figure E1: TYCOON
Descend we now into a deep crevasse
To see, beneath the surface bleak and frore,
The oxygen that made the chilly mass
Into the ocean's ferrous ions pour
Precipitating to the silty floor
Layers that posterity will bring—
Upreared as mountains of rich IRON ORE:
Then lodestone's magnet shall aberrent swing,
Antipodean magnate strike the lyre and sing.

Figure D13: ANOMALOCARIS
Eastward to a warmer, shallow sea,
The womb of Nature: in its sunny brine
Greet multicellular perplexity.
This slug with hackles like a porcupine;
That wormy mass of tentacle and spine;
And, greatest of them all, a swimming PRAWN,
Its mouthparts iris'd open as to dine:
"Ye latter creatures, look on us and mourn.
For each shape that survived, a thousand more were born."

Figure C7: EVENTIDE
A dusky strand beneath a twilit wood
Where no birds sing, heavy with moss and fern:
In a warm age: never has forest stood
So near the Pole, and, as the seasons turn
The sun skims low and never dares to spurn
The dark horizon. See, there, in the shade,
A reptile's shape that heat will never burn,
A great-eyed hunting lizard in the glade.
Above, the Southern Lights in majesty arrayed.

Figure D14: SHORELINE
As Selene her orbit roundabout
Draws now down, now up, the oceans' sides,
So does the Milky Way breathe in and out,
For galaxies, like planets, have their tides,
And on the littoral the Earth abides,
Rich with heavy atoms, in the lee
Where from the super-nova's blast it hides:
In this pool of gas, life came to be,
Along the margins of an interstellar sea.

Figure C9: ANNALS
Moving to the present, here the floor
Of bland and glossy celadon is made.
GEORGE'S STAR, which Herschel's glass first saw,
Is mirrored in each wall of pallid jade:
URANUS, rolling in its orbit laid
Upon its side, around it swing like toys
Its darkling moons, their master's tilt obeyed.
But all along its path is heard a noise,
The giggling of all the ages' little boys. 

Figure D16: TIRYNS
in a distant future, now we see
Our Milky Way is monstrously deployed
To smash into a neighbour galaxy.
(Though scarcely any star shall be destroyed,
So great the space between, yet much annoyed
By tidal currents, hurtled out at speed
To drift away into the cosmic void.)
Yet what Perseus, on what wingéd steed
Shall save ANDROMEDA in this her hour of need?

Figure E12: WORLD-TREE
Just as the minute polyp, year on year,
Erects beneath the wave a mighty reef,
So, though measured 'gainst the heavens' sphere,
A person or a species' life is brief,
Life obeys, of all commands, the chief,
To multiply: across the spiral wheel
It spreads. For this infection, no relief.
Thus is the fabled YGGDRASIL made real
In countless bio-spheres of adamant and steel.

Figure D23: LONE
A chamber paved with marble and azure
And dedicated to a mystery:
Stubborn as stone, where life will long endure
Or delicate snowflake fragility?
The sole oasis in the nullity
Of endless space? Or does life give birth
In any place where light and water be?
Original enigma, Mother EARTH:
From only one example, hard to judge the worth.
