Proem

MNEMOSYNE, Mother Muse, thine aid
Thy loyal servant humbly dares to ask
To consecrate the Palace I have made
To tell where nimble Matter in its Masque
On Earth, in Heaven, in Alembick flask
In childish coyness, never to be seen
Without great labour, bold SCIENTIA'S task,
Of all the mortal arts the regnant Queen
Mistress of all that was, that is, and will have been.

C6	Northwest / present	ground	L

Fig C6: LIGHTNING
Brazen the gate to Lightning's airy room
Northwest it faces, son of Air and Fire.
Amber and glass reflect the ruddy gloom
Webbed with divers strands of copper wire.
Sparks leap and crackle skywards in a gyre,
Conducting waves borne upon Aether's wing:
The music of a vast celestial choir.
A million voices mutter, cry and sing,
And our rebellious garments to our members cling.

B1	West / present	ground	T  *

Fig B1: TEMPEST

South thro' lofty arches we repair
Onto a broad pavillion looking out
From a high prospect: this the realm of Air
Array'd with marble pillars, round about
The zephyr's whisper and the Typhoon's shout
Deafen our hearing - but their are not words
Can tell the vapours, nitrous, rich and stout
Arising from the colony of Birds
Which, nesting here, begrime the marble with their Turds.

C3	West / present / deeps	S

Fig C3: SULPHUR
Down a steep stair we fly the feath'ry stench
In vain, for in the stony room below
Wrung from the rock by stubborn nature's clench
We see a vein of brimstone all aglow
Its creeping azure flames can barely show
Through the vile fumes, like unto an egg
All rotted green inside its shell of snow
Or as salt fish turned foul within its keg
So to the northern door we turn an eager leg.

D10   Northwest / present / deep

Fig D10: OCTAHEDRON
Welcome relief for the indignant Nose
In the next dark chamber we have found.
Sulphur a transformation undergoes
Once it has been to lead in crystals bound.
Black and massy, galena, resound
To the slightest æthereal wave:
Telluric currents thrill deep underground
Guided by cat's-whisker to this cave
So heaviness by light is told, and does behave.

C16    North /  / present / deep

Fig C16:IGNITION
Obsidian the walls of the next vault
Circled around a single sacred flame
From a jagged crack, a riven fault
Consecrated to Hephaestus lame:
A glossy liquid seeps, which humans name
PETROLEUM. The suns of ancient days,
Absorbed by herb, compressed, transformed: to claim
This prize, the blood of industry, the craze
Of Ares' wrath will spur undending battles' blaze.

B7    North  / present / ground

Fig B7: REDOX
A winding stair leads from this solemn scene
Upward to daylight, and a steely gate
All red with rust and twined with tendrils green
Abuzz with life, and creatures, small and great,
Pace their enclosures, pant, and respirate.
So iron, leaf and lung forever burn,
Reduce, combust, exchange and oxidate.
The fire's flame, th'uncoiling of a fern,
In cycles their electrons remit and return.

C24   North East / present / ground	E

Figure C24: EARTHWORKS
Eastward next, into a chamber strange,
Filled with what seems a bulky mass of earth.
Only about its edges may we range,
A musty passage, narrow as a firth.
Its sides bear witness to what gave them birth:
Inverse relief of furniture and walls,
Devoured by termites: beasts of little worth
Consume, digest, transfigure wooden halls:
The daintiest of rooms, for them, but fodder stalls.

D30	North East /  present	deeps	T

Figure D30. T

Down to a cellar, filled with a bracing air,
Crisp, as when a child dashes a stone
Down upon boulders and the sparks leap where
Rock gnashes rock: here flints are shown
Immur'd in lime, knobbed like shards of bone,
Named PARAMOUDRA on Hibernia's shores,
Fire's father, which was in ages grown
In ancient seas. So Nature blindly stores
Resources for mankind in humble madrepores.

E15	future	E	N	future	deeps	EVENTUALLY

Our path now in a new direction lies,
No longer spatial: time-like is our way
Hidden down here from the spinning skies
Millennia are reckoned as a day.
We see a buried future: Earth turned gray
And sere, where humans huddle in their den
Leach from radioactive stones, a stay
Of execution - for the day comes when
Their race at last is run: there'll be no more "And then..."

D27	S	E		future	deeps	WATCHER

Sobered, we leave that mournful place
Southward to an adamantine cell
A myriad of mirrors shows each face
In sparkling facets, wonderful to tell.
Here in this crystal, by atomic spell
All that was thought or said, each laugh, each curse
Is stored until the Universe's knell
The story of your life, your dreams, this verse
Until the very protons shimmer and disperse.

C21	past	E		present	deeps	I

Stone - present - deeps

Figure C21: IRON
Flow back now, Time, and from the future long
Return us to our era: walls and floor
Of Iron now, corruptible and strong.
IRON, of this our Earth the fiery core;
IRON, gray as midnight, red with gore;
IRON that ploughs the field and tames the wild;
IRON, the soul of transport and of war;
IRON, for which we feed th'indignant child
Spinaches and liver, foodstuffs most revil'd.


B8	up	E		present	ground	R

Stone - present - ground

Figure B8: RECURSIVE
On a resounding staircase we ascend
To daylight and a spacious colonnade
That faces hills, rolling without end
To the horizon. Of marble made
Dappled with patterns like to light and shade
On forest floor, or ripples in a lake
As if the same math'mathics were obeyed
In rock, in branch, in flesh, in waves that break:
All things with form from this their master-pattern take.

C19	S	E	S	present	ground	T

Southeast - Stone/Water - present - ground

Figure C19: TRAVERTINE

Toward the south, our vision blocked by steam.
A whiff of sulphur and the sound of drops;
A gust of wind unveils, and, like a dream,
Appears a mighty terrace: from the tops
Of each stepp'd level, trickling water plops
Down to the next, and the droplets bear
Dissolvéd lime, insensibly which stops
To build, atom by atom, a rocky stair
Flowing, liquid, stony, lovely beyond compare.


D22	down	E	S	present	deeps	T

Figure D22: TROGLOBITE

Spiraling down a sinkhole ringed with stairs
We descend once more into the ground.
A watery cave we find, with humid airs
Deep in darkness, but even here are found
Strange forms of life: bats that see with sound,
Long-legged bugs that palpitate their way
And in the streams translucent fish abound.
Here the OLM blindly hunts its prey,
Obscene and pallid worm, best hidden from the day.

E11 future: SE present deeps T

Figure E11: TESTUDO
Move we again to far futurity
(Potential, as all such visions are):
Deep below the crust, a sunless sea
Is hidden from the wrath of mother star
As bloated, red, she turns the land to char.
Dark in light only: see, in INFRA-RED,
Deep vents glow bright, the surface black as tar.
Vast Leviathans swim here, filter-fed,
So life within continues though the shell be dead.

