Proem

MNEMOSYNE, Mother Muse, thine aid
Thy loyal servant humbly dares to ask
To consecrate the Palace I have made
To tell where nimble Matter in its Masque
On Earth, in Heaven, in Alembick flask
In childish coyness, never to be seen
Without great labour, bold SCIENTIA'S task,
Of all the mortal arts the regnant Queen
Mistress of all that was, that is, and will have been.

C6	Northwest / present	ground	L

Fig C6: LIGHTNING
Brazen the gate to Lightning's airy room
Northwest it faces, son of Air and Fire.
Amber and glass reflect the ruddy gloom
Webbed with divers strands of copper wire.
Sparks leap and crackle skywards in a gyre,
Conducting waves borne upon Aether's wing:
The music of a vast celestial choir.
A million voices mutter, cry and sing,
And our rebellious garments to our members cling.

B1	West / present	ground	T  *

Fig B1: TEMPEST

South thro' lofty arches we repair
Onto a broad pavillion looking out
From a high prospect: this the realm of Air
Array'd with marble pillars, round about
The zephyr's whisper and the Typhoon's shout
Deafen our hearing - but their are not words
Can tell the vapours, nitrous, rich and stout
Arising from the colony of Birds
Which, nesting here, begrime the marble with their Turds.

C3	West / present / deeps	S

Fig C3: SULPHUR
Down a steep stair we fly the feath'ry stench
In vain, for in the stony room below
Wrung from the rock by stubborn nature's clench
We see a vein of brimstone all aglow
Its creeping azure flames can barely show
Through the vile fumes, like unto an egg
All rotted green inside its shell of snow
Or as salt fish turned foul within its keg
So to the northern door we turn an eager leg.

D10   Northwest / present / deep

Fig D10: OCTAHEDRON
Welcome relief for the indignant Nose
In the next dark chamber we have found.
Sulphur a transformation undergoes
Once it has been to lead in crystals bound.
Black and massy, galena, resound
To the slightest æthereal wave:
Telluric currents thrill deep underground
Guided by cat's-whisker to this cave
So heaviness by light is told, and does behave.

C16    North /  / present / deep

Fig C16:IGNITION
Obsidian the walls of the next vault
Circled around a single sacred flame
From a jagged crack, a riven fault
Consecrated to Hephaestus lame:
A glossy liquid seeps, which humans name
PETROLEUM. The suns of ancient days,
Absorbed by herb, compressed, transformed: to claim
This prize, the blood of industry, the craze
Of Ares' wrath will spur undending battles' blaze.

B7    North  / present / ground

Fig B7: REDOX
A winding stair leads from this solemn scene
Upward to daylight, and a steely gate
All red with rust and twined with tendrils green
Abuzz with life, and creatures, small and great,
Pace their enclosures, pant, and respirate.
So iron, leaf and lung forever burn,
Reduce, combust, exchange and oxidate.
The fire's flame, th'uncoiling of a fern,
In cycles their electrons remit and return.

C24   North East / present / ground	E

Figure C24: EARTHWORKS
Eastward next, into a chamber strange,
Filled with what seems a bulky mass of earth.
Only about its edges may we range,
A musty passage, narrow as a firth.
Its sides bear witness to what gave them birth:
Inverse relief of furniture and walls,
Devoured by termites: beasts of little worth
Consume, digest, transfigure wooden halls:
The daintiest of rooms, for them, but fodder stalls.

D30	North East /  present	deeps	T

Figure D30. T

Down to a cellar, filled with a bracing air,
Crisp, as when a child dashes a stone
Down upon boulders and the sparks leap where
Rock gnashes rock: here flints are shown
Immur'd in lime, knobbed like shards of bone,
Named PARAMOUDRA on Hibernia's shores,
Fire's father, which was in ages grown
In ancient seas. So Nature blindly stores
Resources for mankind in humble madrepores.

E15	future	E	N	future	deeps	EVENTUALLY

Our path now in a new direction lies,
No longer spatial: time-like is our way
Hidden down here from the spinning skies
Millennia are reckoned as a day.
We see a buried future: Earth turned gray
And sere, where humans huddle in their den
Leach from radioactive stones, a stay
Of execution - for the day comes when
Their race at last is run: there'll be no more "And then..."

D27	S	E		future	deeps	WATCHER

Sobered, we leave that mournful place
Southward to an adamantine cell
A myriad of mirrors shows each face
In sparkling facets, wonderful to tell.
Here in this crystal, by atomic spell
All that was thought or said, each laugh, each curse
Is stored until the Universe's knell
The story of your life, your dreams, this verse
Until the very protons shimmer and disperse.

C21	past	E		present	deeps	I

Stone - present - deeps

Figure C21: IRON
Flow back now, Time, and from the future long
Return us to our era: walls and floor
Of Iron now, corruptible and strong.
IRON, of this our Earth the fiery core;
IRON, gray as midnight, red with gore;
IRON that ploughs the field and tames the wild;
IRON, the soul of transport and of war;
IRON, for which we feed th'indignant child
Spinaches and liver, foodstuffs most revil'd.


B8	up	E		present	ground	R

Stone - present - ground

Figure B8: RECURSIVE
On a resounding staircase we ascend
To daylight and a spacious colonnade
That faces hills, rolling without end
To the horizon. Of marble made
Dappled with patterns like to light and shade
On forest floor, or ripples in a lake
As if the same math'mathics were obeyed
In rock, in branch, in flesh, in waves that break:
All things with form from this their master-pattern take.

C19	S	E	S	present	ground	T

Southeast - Stone/Water - present - ground

Figure C19: TRAVERTINE

Toward the south, our vision blocked by steam.
A whiff of sulphur and the sound of drops;
A gust of wind unveils, and, like a dream,
Appears a mighty terrace: from the tops
Of each stepp'd level, trickling water plops
Down to the next, and the droplets bear
Dissolvéd lime, insensibly which stops
To build, atom by atom, a rocky stair
Flowing, liquid, stony, lovely beyond compare.


D22	down	E	S	present	deeps	T

Figure D22: TROGLOBITE

Spiraling down a sinkhole ringed with stairs
We descend once more into the ground.
A watery cave we find, with humid airs
Deep in darkness, but even here are found
Strange forms of life: bats that see with sound,
Long-legged bugs that palpitate their way
And in the streams translucent fish abound.
Here the OLM blindly hunts its prey,
Obscene and pallid worm, best hidden from the day.

E11 future: SE deeps T

Figure E11: TESTUDO
Move we again to far futurity
(Potential, as all such visions are):
Deep below the crust, a sunless sea
Is hidden from the wrath of mother star
As bloated, red, she turns the land to char.
Dark in light only: see, in INFRA-RED,
Deep vents glow bright, the surface black as tar.
Vast Leviathans swim here, filter-fed,
So life within continues though the shell be dead.

D24 future: SE ground T

Figure D24: TERRA
Upward now, but not to scorching skies
Futures, by nature manifold, not one
An odour as of clay that bakes and dries
A room of rude ADOBE, where the sun
Filters thro' torn curtains: here has run
A million years of mixture, which has made
All matter jumbled, entropick and dun:
As coloured doughs, when long have children played,
Revert to an unhealthy purple-brownish shade.

C10 future: S ground G

Figure C10: GLOBE
By a crude door westward, to a pier
Of rough-hewn coral blocks amid a sea
Calm and shallow, marvellously clear.
Earth in its dotage lacks the energy
To rear up mountains, so the water, free
To grind and weather has worn down the world
To one vast shallows, where, languidly
The heirs of humans bask, gills unfurl'd,
No longer by the tides of earthly passions whirl'd.

D15 future: S deeps I

Figure D15: INDOLENS 
Down where nameless horrors wind and slurp,
Dreaming on a dark abyssal plain
Of punishing those apes who dared usurp
Thy brutal, dark and cephalopodic reign-
But humans are no more; so all in vain
Thy long-departed cultists wail'd and leapt.
There are no brains to eat and plunge in pain:
Thy appointment with the stars was left unkept.
Alas, o Elder One, thou hast long overslept.

C8	past		S	present	deeps	S

Figure C8: SIPHON
To present, now, in a low chamber, moist
And busy, full of engines intertwined
Lever and waterwheel, pulley and joist
Rotate and shift, most cunningly designed.
From smaller cups to larger, so we find
Each trickle turns a larger, slower wheel
The tiniest turn quickest, while the mind
Can barely credit that the largest reel
Is turned by little drops, a Juggernaut of steel.

Figure B2: SPINDRIFT
In daylight, now, see breakers crash and hiss,
They bring ambiguous gifts, long afloat:
This fetid mass, the precious AMBERGRIS,
Or refuse from the galley of a boat?
An emerald, fit for a prince's throat,
Or weathered fragment of a flask of ale?
A totem, black and hornéd like a goat,
Or casing in which infant sharks set sail?
Art and nature blend as mermaid's top and tail.

Figure C1: NEBEL
Westward from that shore, we see a wall
Frozen but indistinct, as if a cloud
Were still and square: through a ghostly hall
We enter, footsteps muffled by the shroud
Of the strange pavement, for nothing loud
Can enter this blue chamber, builded well,
Each brick is an infinitesimal crowd
Of tiny atomies, an ÆRO-GEL,
A smoke made solid, that no wind can e'er dispel.

Figure D2: RELEASE
Downward to a well sunk deep below
The ocean's surface, in a rattling cage
Of iron bars—here, as white as snow,
In ice is trapped, by pressure and long age,
A treasure and a peril: history's page
May show this methane, product of the sun,
As worthy of our poor descendants' rage
As we may be. Let it not be undone,
A fearful form of feedback, this, the CLATHRATE-GUN.

Figure E3: AMPHIBIAN
Take us now far from this tipping point
Into a future, cavernous, dim, with stink
Ammoniack and rank: without joint,
All smooth our round enclosure, nacre-pink,
This is the cockpit: see, the pilots think
And their great living vessel does obey.
The bladder closes round us and we sink
Or rise as it expands: in this far day
Such living submarines will ply their finny way.

Figure D4: NEAT
Disgorged like Jonah from the living barque
Wading through a foaming, busy sea
We pass between great buttresses and dark,
The members of a mighty BANYAN-TREE.
Trained by genetick to remedy
The planet's technological distress,
Infusing its carbonic legacy
Into the ocean, where it may harm less.
See, the children play in waves that effervesce.

Figure E4: UNSTABLE
Around great limbs, a winding stair ascend
Up to a lofty chamber. Here, the fate
Of space itself is pondered; if it tend,
As must all things, unto a lower state
Of energy, the peril may be great.
The very vacuum splintering shall go
From one small seed, dying at the rate
Of light itself: small comfort, for this woe,
That if or when it happen, none can ever know.

Figure D3: SATURN
These upper rooms are to celestial spheres
Devoted: present, now, a cork-lined room
Sacred to SATURNUS, long of years.
Pale yellow, nursing Titan's icy womb,
Though lord of death and of the leaden tomb
And that old verse which ancient Latins sing
Yet light enough to float like ocean's spume
(If it were possible to do the thing)
And round a giant bathtub leave a mighty ring.

Figure E2: ICES
Still backward run the clock, until we see
(In inward vision of the heavens past)
A maelstrom of nebulosity
Around the infant Sun. Revolving fast,
The inner circle, subject to the blast
Of newborn light, too hot for ice to form:
Outwards, frosty fragments form the vast
Gas giants: 'twixt them, planetesimals swarm.
The FROST-LINE great from small partitions, cool from warm.

Figure D1: GLACIAL
As we descend, with clouds of foggy breath
We enter a bleak citadel of ice
Facing a frozen plain. Nothing but death,
It seems, rules here: see the heavy price
Paid by the Earth, locked in a chilly vice.
Yet it was tiny microbes made this pall
(An age, yet in Earth's ages but a trice)
Whose oxygen made greenhouse gases fall:
Thus see a world transformed by the very small.

Figure E1 SW Past Deeps

Figure E1: T
Descend we now into a deep crevasse
To see, beneath the surface bleak and frore,
The oxygen that made the chilly mass
Into the ocean's ferrous ions pour
Precipitating to the silty floor
Layers that posterity will bring—
Upreared as mountains of rich IRON ORE:
Then lodestone's magnet shall aberrent swing,
Antipodean magnate strike the lyre and sing.


Figure D13: ANOMALOCARIS
Eastward to a warmer, shallow sea,
The womb of Nature: in its sunny brine
Greet multicellular perplexity.
This slug with hackles like a porcupine;
That wormy mass of tentacle and spine;
And, greatest of them all, a swimming PRAWN,
Its mouthparts iris'd open as to dine:
"Ye latter creatures, look on us and mourn.
For each shape that survived, a thousand more were born."

Figure C7: EVENTIDE
A dusky strand beneath a twilit wood
Where no birds sing, heavy with moss and fern:
In a warm age: never has forest stood
So near the Pole, and, as the seasons turn
The sun skims low and never dares to spurn
The dark horizon. See, there, in the shade,
A reptile's shape that heat will never burn,
A great-eyed hunting lizard in the glade.
Above, the Southern Lights in majesty arrayed.

Figure D14: SHORELINE
As Selene her orbit roundabout
Draws now down, now up, the oceans' sides,
So does the Milky Way breathe in and out,
For galaxies, like planets, have their tides,
And on the littoral the Earth abides,
Rich with heavy atoms, in the lee
Where from the super-nova's blast it hides:
In this pool of gas, life came to be,
Along the margins of an interstellar sea.

Figure C9: ANNALS
Moving to the present, here the floor
Of bland and glossy celadon is made.
GEORGE'S STAR, which Herschel's glass first saw,
Is mirrored in each wall of pallid jade:
URANUS, rolling in its orbit laid
Upon its side, around it swing like toys
Its darkling moons, their master's tilt obeyed.
But all along its path is heard a noise,
The giggling of all the ages' little boys. 

Figure D16: TIRYNS
in a distant future, now we see
Our Milky Way is monstrously deployed
To smash into a neighbour galaxy.
(Though scarcely any star shall be destroyed,
So great the space between, yet much annoyed
By tidal currents, hurtled out at speed
To drift away into the cosmic void.)
Yet what Perseus, on what wingéd steed
Shall save ANDROMEDA in this her hour of need?

Figure E12: WORLD-TREE
Just as the minute polyp, year on year,
Erects beneath the wave a mighty reef,
So, though measured 'gainst the heavens' sphere,
A person or a species' life is brief,
Life obeys, of all commands, the chief,
To multiply: across the spiral wheel
It spreads. For this infection, no relief.
Thus is the fabled YGGDRASIL made real
In countless bio-spheres of adamant and steel.

Figure D23: LONE
A chamber paved with marble and azure
And dedicated to a mystery:
Stubborn as stone, where life will long endure
Or delicate snowflake fragility?
The sole oasis in the nullity
Of endless space? Or does life give birth
In any place where light and water be?
Original enigma, Mother EARTH:
From only one example, hard to judge the worth.


