Figure C6: LIGHTNING
Brazen the gate to Lightning's airy room
Northwest it faces, son of Air and Fire.
Amber and glass reflect the ruddy gloom
Webbed with divers strands of copper wire.
Sparks leap and crackle skywards in a gyre,
Conducting waves borne upon Aether's wing:
The music of a vast celestial choir.
A million voices mutter, cry and sing,
And our rebellious garments to our members cling.

Figure B1: TEMPEST
South thro' lofty arches we repair
Onto a broad pavillion looking out
From a high prospect: this the realm of Air
Array'd with marble pillars, round about
The zephyr's whisper and the Typhoon's shout
Deafen our hearing - but their are not words
Can tell the vapours, nitrous, rich and stout
Arising from the colony of Birds
Which, nesting here, begrime the marble with their Turds.

Figure C3: SULPHUR
Down a steep stair we fly the feath'ry stench
In vain, for in the stony room below
Wrung from the rock by stubborn nature's clench
We see a vein of brimstone all aglow
Its creeping azure flames can barely show
Through the vile fumes, like unto an egg
All rotted green inside its shell of snow
Or as salt fish turned foul within its keg
So to the northern door we turn an eager leg.

Figure D10: OCTAHEDRON
Welcome relief for the indignant Nose
In the next dark chamber we have found.
Sulphur a transformation undergoes
Once it has been to lead in crystals bound.
Black and massy, galena, resound
To the slightest æthereal wave:
Telluric currents thrill deep underground
Guided by cat's-whisker to this cave
So heaviness by light is told, and does behave.

Figure C16: IGNITION
Obsidian the walls of the next vault
Circled around a single sacred flame
From a jagged crack, a riven fault
Consecrated to Hephaestus lame:
A glossy liquid seeps, which humans name
PETROLEUM. The suns of ancient days,
Absorbed by herb, compressed, transformed: to claim
This prize, the blood of industry, the craze
Of Ares' wrath will spur undending battles' blaze.

Figure B7: REDOX
A winding stair leads from this solemn scene
Upward to daylight, and a steely gate
All red with rust and twined with tendrils green
Abuzz with life, and creatures, small and great,
Pace their enclosures, pant, and respirate.
So iron, leaf and lung forever burn,
Reduce, combust, exchange and oxidate.
The fire's flame, th'uncoiling of a fern,
In cycles their electrons remit and return.

Figure C24: EARTHWORKS
Eastward next, into a chamber strange,
Filled with what seems a bulky mass of earth.
Only about its edges may we range,
A musty passage, narrow as a firth.
Its sides bear witness to what gave them birth:
Inverse relief of furniture and walls,
Devoured by termites: beasts of little worth
Consume, digest, transfigure wooden halls:
The daintiest of rooms, for them, but fodder stalls.

Figure D30: TINDER
Down to a cellar, filled with a bracing air,
Crisp, as when a child dashes a stone
Down upon boulders and the sparks leap where
Rock gnashes rock: here flints are shown
Immur'd in lime, knobbed like shards of bone,
Named PARAMOUDRA on Hibernia's shores,
Fire's father, which was in ages grown
In ancient seas. So Nature blindly stores
Resources for mankind in humble madrepores.

Figure E15: EVENTUALLY
Our path now in a new direction lies,
No longer spatial: time-like is our way
Hidden down here from the spinning skies
Millennia are reckoned as a day.
We see a buried future: Earth turned gray
And sere, where humans huddle in their den
Leach from radioactive stones, a stay
Of execution - for the day comes when
Their race at last is run: there'll be no more "And then..."
