Figure C23: ORBIT
Descend from that high vision, dark and chill
To Earth once more. The Sun, no more the bud
Of blinding white we know, has bloomed until
It covers half the sky. The ocean's flood
Has boiled away: to brick has baked its mud.
Mercury and Venus disappear
Like iron pellets in a sea of blood.
Yet see Man's metal servants whoop and cheer
As Earth skips like a stone across the photosphere.

Figure D32: TEPID
A simple fence surrounding ashy meads,
And in their midst, a tuffet dark and low
Lies steaming in the mud. A notice reads:
"The Earth was not so steadfast long ago,
"When continents could drift and lava flow.
"But age and dryness made the engine stall
"That once made mountains smoke and belch and glow.
"Stranger, you see Earth's last fires fall:
"EXIGUUS, the last volcano of them all."

Figure E16: ACCRETION
Ascend: to see the monster at the heart,
Devourer of suns, a DARKLING STAR.
Although it seem that it must be the part
Of every mass to fall into this scar
Upon the void, geometry shall bar
Its passage, as the needle's narrow eye
Will scarce admit the camel. It is far
More straitened, a pinpoint against a sky.
So, crowding at the gate, the fierce emissions sigh.

Figure D31: RETROGRADE
Murmurs the wind as lightly as a dove,
We enter a high chamber, well endowed
With all the soft accoutrements of love,
That looks out on an opalescent cloud.
It hides a tortured land beneath its shroud:
A barren hell, rotating retroflex.
VENUS GENETRIX, beautiful and proud,
See science thy mythology perplex
And make thine Evening Star a slander on thy sex.

Figure E14: IMPACT
Quitting Venus, torrid yet serene,
We shift once more into the deeper past
To gaze upon a cataclysmic scene:
Four giant planets, crowded, racing fast
About the Sun, till Jupiter has cast
His three companions distant from their flock
Of planetesimals, which fall to blast
The inner planets. Battered by the shock,
See Luna's blemishes, a testament to rock.

Figure D18: CONTINUUM
As we peer still deeper into space
The scholar reads a panoply of signs
That tell each epoch's story, keeping pace
As we descend in darkness in the mines
Of ancient photons: see the spectral lines,
The LYMAN-ALPHA FOREST - as the light
Of young chaotic galaxies combines
With neutral hydrogen, and so the bright
Mad furnace of the quasar shows a billion years of light.

Figure C17: EXTREMES
From such a distant past, the present seems
To dazzle and confuse us. Rocky walls
Rough-hewn glow white in horizontal beams
Of the low sun, which e'en at twilight spalls
Hot ions from the stone on which it falls,
Yet at our feet the floor is all of ice.
The sunlight sweeps: at intervals, it stalls
As MERCURY turns three times, orbits twice,
Its polar craters in eternal winter's vise.

Figure D20: TELOS
From this small fire, to an end of days.
If universal growth had been subdued
By gravity, to fall back in a blaze,
Would time reverse? We see a vision crude,
Men rising from their graves and puking food.
Yet may such simple fancy run amiss.
The GREAT RETURN, our unity renewed,
May bring not fiery doom, but synthesis,
A richer world. No meagre consolation, this.

Figure C18: ACOUSTIC
Descend to utter dark, where we can see
Nothing but black, yet feel the open air.
A future time where fire's energy
Has used up all its fuel, but Nature fair
Repays the want with SOUND. Now, listen, where
The forest murmurs dimly, hear the poise
And grace of soaring birds, the music rare
That moonlight jingles from the waves its toys,
And warm your hands before a brazier of noise.
